# Metformin reduces the competitive advantage of Dnmt3a R878H HSPCs

Mohsen Hosseini 1 , Veronique Voisin 2# , Ali Chegini 1,3# , Angelica Varesi 1,4# , Severine Cathelin 1# ,
Dhanoop Manikoth Ayyathan 1 , Alex C.H. Liu 1,3 , Yitong Yang 1,3 , Vivian Wang 1,3 , Abdula Maher 1 ,
Eric Grignano 1 , Julie A. Reisz 5 , Angelo D’Alessandro 5 , Kira Young 6 , Yiyan Wu 3 , Martina
Fiumara 7,8 , Samuele Ferrari 7,8 , Luigi Naldini 7,8 , Federico Gaiti 1,3 , Shraddha Pai 2,9 , Grace Egan 1,10 ,
Aaron D. Schimmer 1,3 , Gary D. Bader 2 , John E. Dick 1,4 , Stephanie Z. Xie 1 , Jennifer J.
Trowbridge 6 , and Steven M. Chan 1,3 *

*Abstract* <br>
Clonal hematopoiesis (CH) arises when a hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) acquires a mutation
that confers a competitive advantage over wild-type (WT) HSCs. Individuals with CH are at an
increased risk of developing hematologic neoplasms and other age-related illnesses 1-3 .
Suppressing the expansion of mutant HSCs has the potential to prevent these outcomes;
however, such interventions have not yet been identified. The most common CH driver
mutations are in the DNA methyltransferase 3 alpha (DNMT3A) gene with arginine 882 (R882)
being a mutation hotspot. Here we show that murine hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells
(HSPCs) carrying the Dnmt3a R878H/+ mutation, which is equivalent to human DNMT3A R882H/+ , have
increased mitochondrial respiration compared with WT cells and are dependent on this metabolic
reprogramming for their competitive advantage. Treatment with metformin, an anti-diabetic drug
that inhibits mitochondrial respiration, reduced the competitive advantage of Dnmt3a R878H/+ HSCs.
Through a multi-omics approach, we discovered that metformin acts by enhancing the
methylation potential in Dnmt3a R878H/+ HSPCs and reversing their aberrant DNA CpG methylation
and histone H3K27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) profiles. Metformin also reduced the
competitive advantage of human DNMT3A R882H HSPCs generated by prime editing. Our findings
provide rationale for investigating metformin as a preventive intervention against DNMT3A R882
mutation-driven CH in humans.

*Data availability under the GEO repository* <br>
GSE254822 - [CITE-Seq]
GSE255100 - [bulkRNA]
GSE255101 - 
GSE255550 - [ChIP-seq]
GSE255788 - [RRBS]

